# Project motivation

This document will argue why this bike network software can help achieve the
UN's [Sustainable Development Goal 11](https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal11) of
improving cities.

<!-- theory of change diagram as a summary -->

## Driving is a problem

According to the EPA,
[29% of greenhouse cases in the USA come from transportation in 2019](https://www.epa.gov/transportation-air-pollution-and-climate-change/carbon-pollution-transportation).
Driving causes many other externalities -- noise pollution, an incredible amount
of space is used for parking, collisions kill many people, and incentivizing
driving reinforces suburban sprawl and unsustainable land use patterns. Even
though less people drove in 2020,
[more people died from car collisions](https://www.nhtsa.gov/press-releases/2020-fatality-data-show-increased-traffic-fatalities-during-pandemic).
Similar statistics can be found across most of the world. Many people have made
strong arguments that cities need to drastically reduce the use of personal
motor vehicles for trips.

A popular deflection currently is that fossil-fuel based cars are the problem,
and that electric vehicles will solve these problems. While they certainly help
with engine emissions, they still pollute due to
[tires](https://epha.org/electric-vehicles-and-air-pollution-the-claims-and-the-facts/)
and do nothing to help with the space consumption or collision problem. And
migrating the majority of gas cars to electric would be incredibly expensive
anyway.

Another false promise is autonomous vehicles. The technology is seemingly always
a few years away from wide rollout. Even once it's ready, there's a very real
risk that it'll just exasperate problems with suburban sprawl even more, by
letting people tolerate longer hands-off commutes. As Tom MacWright has
explained,
[beware the ethical car](https://macwright.com/2019/07/27/beware-the-ethical-car.html).

### The alternatives to driving

Major European and Asian cities have effective mass public transit, and some --
the Netherlands being the most famous example -- have a high percentage of trips
done via bicycle. The world isn't missing some new technology like autonomous
cars; car-centric places have plenty of sources of inspiration for how to design
sustainable transportation systems.

Transitioning away from cars is a very complicated problem, and the solution
probably involves land use changes (allowing mixed commercial/residential use to
create 15-minute neighborhoods, and changing zoning laws to allow mid-rise
residential buildings where only single-family homes exist today), investing in
public transit (both local buses and regional high-speed rail), designing proper
spaces for walking and biking, and encouraging remote working and staggered
commute times. It's also important to discourage automobile use as these
alternatives become available, by ending gas subsidies, implementing congestion
charges around city centers, removing parking minimum requirements, and so on.

Many of these changes are expensive or very complicated and slow to implement.

### The case for biking

This project focuses on a small piece of the solution: biking. Both cost and
benefit motivate this. Amazingly,
[60% of trips in the US are under 5 miles](https://www.bikeleague.org/content/national-household-travel-survey-short-trips-analysis)
-- a range easily covered by a bike or an e-bike.
[This report](https://usa.streetsblog.org/2021/03/30/why-the-u-s-needs-a-bold-2030-mode-shift-target/)
estimates that urban transport emissions could be reduced by 7% if a modest 16%
of trips were shifted from driving to biking. Biking also gets people doing
moderate exercise, and it's even a low-impact activity for people with knee
injuries! The barrier of entry and cost is much lower than driving, making it a
more widely accessible option.

One of the main barriers stopping people from switching to biking is safety.
Most streets are designed for moving vehicles quickly and can be incredibly
unsafe for cycling. Luckily, the cost of reallocating the space on these streets
to separate cyclists from motor vehicle traffic is low, compared to building new
light rail lines or improving bus route frequency. In the extreme case, making a
road more comfortable to bike on can be done with very little money or time, via
techniques of [tactical urbanism](http://tacticalurbanismguide.com/about/). Some
advocacy groups or cities will set up a temporary demonstration of a changed
street by simply using signs and movable barriers for a few days, and in other
cases, these street improvements are even
[installed in th dead of night by citizen activists](https://www.seattlebikeblog.com/2013/04/04/guerrilla-road-safety-group-politely-installs-illegal-bike-lane-protectors-on-cherry-street/).

### Rising momentum

Right now, cities across the world are actively finding ways to reduce car
dependency. This is a ripe time to accelerate this culture shift. Some examples:

- [Paris has installed a huge number of new bike lanes, and seen usage skyrocket](https://archive.curbed.com/2020/1/15/21065343/bike-paris-cycling-anne-hidalgo)
- In the middle of the sprawling Phoenix metro area, the new
  [Culdesac](https://culdesac.com) project is building the US's first car-free
  neighborhood
- Many US cities are attempting [Vision Zero](https://visionzeronetwork.org/)
  plans to reduce the number of traffic fatalities
- [Birmingham](https://covidmeasuresbirmingham.commonplace.is/proposals/kings-heath-low-traffic-neighbourhood)
  is piloting a low-traffic neighborhood
- Advocates are pushing for a massive
  [car-free zone in Berlin](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/oct/06/berlins-car-ban-campaign-its-about-how-we-want-to-live-breathe-and-play)
- Many US cities transformed
  [streets into outdoor dining spaces](https://nacto.org/publication/streets-for-pandemic-response-recovery/emerging-street-strategies/outdoor-dining/)
  during COVID. This kind of change would never have happened politically a few
  years ago!
- Some US cities are considering
  [removing highways](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/05/27/climate/us-cities-highway-removal.html)
  that tear through the city center and have been historically used for
  [redlining](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redlining)

In short, the public imagination is picking up on these ideas. But this needs to
happen as fast as possible to transform cities into more sustainable places and
mitigate climate disasters.

## Barriers to change

<!-- portland slide deck on what it takes to build, how long -->

So why isn't every city following Paris and building out a low-cost bike network
to encourage people to stop driving? The issue is often quite political -- if
city leaders build without the support of their constituents, they won't be
re-elected. The public are very much stakeholders. There's often quite fierce
opposition to building new bike lanes. Sometimes the arguments are somewhat
based on specifics -- some parking will be lost, and despite studies showing
otherwise, nearby businesses fear losing customers. (But these arguments rarely
quantify how much parking is available nearby -- largely because this data
doesn't generally exist without an on-the-ground survey.) Others make a very
short-term argument that vehicle traffic will be delayed by the reduction in
lanes, and this will actually increase pollution in the area. In other words,
the concerns raised are by individuals who don't buy into the idea of "mode
shift" at all -- that the **purpose** of the new cycling infrastructure is to
make driving a bit less enticing and encourage people to move more sustainably.
Some people quite understandably feel "left out" by these transformations --
they've lived in the city for a long time, moved around it in a certain way, and
they feel threatened by the changes. Making it safer to bike is inextricably
tied up in this concern about gentrification -- driving out long-time residents
for younger, often wealthier people who are seen as the target audience of the
changes.

This is a really unfortunate miscommunication. Proper cycling infrastructure and
land use patterns make it very comfortable for all ages and abilities and
demographics to thrive in a city. If cycling is just for young and athletic
people, why does the percentage of people biking in the Netherlands and Japan
include TODO? Driving a car is quite expensive, with insurance and maintenance,
and children or people with vision impairment are totally excluded. Cycling can
be more inclusive.

A strong theme in the rhetoric around resisting change is that "the new
infrastructure won't serve me individually." This view definitely ignores how
many people the changes _will_ serve. But it's also short-sighted -- if lots of
_other_ people switch away from driving, that's less cars on the road and less
traffic for the individual who wishes to continue. We all breathe the same air,
so reducing the vehicles on the road will benefit everyone. This is a
longer-term, broader consequence that's hard to understand.

Another problem with reasoning about incremental changes (often for just a
single stretch of road being redesigned) is ignoring the long-term vision.
Cities use "master plans" and other long-term planning documents to communicate
the overall direction, and may explain the individual changes in context of this
vision. But if that story isn't effectively told, then the public can wind up
arguing too much about the details.

<!-- how do we boost the voice of people fighting for transpo change? by software to visualize. humans are really visual. draw the world how it could be, sell citizens on that idea, engage their imagination how streets could be used instead. -->

In other words, I'm arguing that one of the biggest problems is around
communication. If city leaders could more effectively market a proposal to their
constituents, and if the public was better educated about the indirect
consequences of these changes, I believe the political will to deliver changes
would gain traction.

Let's look at how this communication happens today.

### Large-scale changes

As a first example, let's look at Seattle's bike master plan, which describes
what the bike network will look like by 2025? The official documents include a
PDF with a map that's pretty tough to use... and an ArcGIS map that's a little
better, but...

A second example is Seattle Neighborhood Greenways, an advocacy group,
describing which streets they'd like to see changed to prioritize people walking
and biking, as a way to encourage exercise and social distancing during COVID.
Their plans are a layer on top of Google Maps.

Individuals are accustomed to interacting with maps by routing, to see what
their particular trip might look like. None of these solutions let you plan a
trip and compare how things might look before vs after the changes. As an
individual, I want to know if these plans will make it safer, let me avoid
hills, or let me comfortably bike past a commercial district. I have to
interpret these planned changes and apply them to my particular situation. Or if
I care about broader impact, these documents fail to sell me on the benefits,
"we forecast that 200,000 weekly trips will likely start biking instead of
driving if we make these changes. That could lower PM2.5 pollution by X..."

These methods of communication are also very "dry" -- they do nothing to paint a
picture or tell a story about how awesome the city will be once this is built.

### Individual projects

Let's examine plans to install a "lid" over the 520 highway in Montlake,
Seattle. The plans show a new park where there used to just be a loud,
unpleasant road. This is a little better in terms of visioning. But advocacy
blogs have called out some important questions about these plans -- notice how
many lanes pedestrians will have to cross. How long will people wait for a
light? In other words, what's the actual experience of just moving through the
space as a pedestrian? A static map or diagram is going to have a hard time
communicating this.

<!-- find some of the ~complicated design renderings -->

<!-- SF's story map is huge step forwards -->

### Gathering public feedback

Besides just asking people how they feel about some proposals, sometimes
governments directly solicit ideas from people -- a form of crowd-sourcing.
Seattle's Your Voice, Your Choice (link) is an example, where people can drop
pins on a map, describe a problem and possible solution. This program is meant
for low-cost, "spot fixes" like making a certain intersection safer.

Probably the state-of-the-art in public engagement is Streetmix, a very
easy-to-use and fun website that lets you rearrange space along a single street.
People routinely share ideas through Streetmix, and public agencies often
explain changes using it. The sheer ease-of-use and strong visuals are keys to
its success -- the creators have a strong design background, and it pays off.
Proposals in Streetmix have even become reality -- Bogota gathered X proposals
from the public, then settled on something based on these designs.

Members of the public aren't experts in transportation engineering, so why not
leave the work to the professionals? Laura Adler writes... "x". Individuals
_are_ experts at some slice of the city, since they interact with it every day.
It's unlikely city planners know every corner of the city as deeply as everyone
else combined, so incorporating their experiences is important.

Besides generating better proposals, [participatory design](link) can also
decrease resistance to change. Brian Deegan, a UK planner, describes this
[during a workshop for planning low-traffic neighborhoods]. When he frames
things as a puzzle -- "The number of cars has doubled since X, they just don't
fit, we have to fix this somehow" -- people set aside their personal biases and
just treat it as an abstract problem to solve. As a result, everyone in the room
feels more invested in the ideas produced. "Gamifying" the planning process
could be powerful.

## How this project can help

A/B Street in general and this bike tool in particular are an attempt to:

1. help different stakeholders communicate more effectively
2. visually inspire people to see what their city could become
3. increase public engagement in transportation planning and amplify voices

Some example "success stories" might look like this:

1. City planners use the software to sell the public on existing plans
   (struggling with funding cuts)
2. Advocacy groups help amplify that message
3. Support for the plans grows, people vote to fund it

Or:

1. The government is struggling to implement a contentious low-traffic
   neighborhood plan. A vocal minority of the public is demanding the changes
   are cancelled.
2. The city organizes an online "competition" to design the best compromise,
   using the new software
3. People self-organize and debate their competing solutions to a shared puzzle,
   focusing on the details specific to their area
4. The government adopts the winning solution and people accept it more readily,
   **because they've been forced to work through the trade-offs of alternatives
   themselves**

To clarify, A/B Street isn't meant to replace any internal CAD or engineering
processes that the city already internally uses. It's meant for rapid
prototyping and communication; it's a new first step in the design process.

### Prior art

Other software exists for related problems. But nothing other than A/B Street:

- visualizes as much detail about existing street layout and bicycle facilities
- lets users easily mock up changes to a bike network, and route using the
  changes
- works anywhere in the world without substantial setup time
- is free and available to anybody

http://streetmix.net is a huge inspiration behind A/B Street. But it only
focuses on an individual street segment; it can't show how bicycle
infrastructure exists in context of an entire city.

http://remix.com has some similar goals, but it's meant for different city
agencies to internally collaborate. It's expensive, unavailable to the public,
and cities are only just starting to use it for public communication.

https://www.ptvgroup.com/en/solutions/products/ptv-vissim/ is an
industry-standard traffic simulator, with highly accurate modeling results. But
it's extremely expensive and very difficult to use, especially when initially
setting up in a new city.

https://www.matsim.org/ and https://www.eclipse.org/sumo/ are open source
traffic simulators that can run anywhere in the world. However, they're hard to
setup and use, not focused on visualization, and can't easily prototyping
changes to roads. They also don't run in web browsers, a further barrier towards
non-technical individuals trying them.
