# Dustin's vision for Seattle's bike network

I've been commuting almost exclusively by bike here since 2014. I've had too
many close calls and plenty of frustratign moments when it feels like the design
is trying to discourage this mode of transport as much as possible. i want to
see network tht encourages as many people as possible to choose biking over
driving.

so many times, i wish i had a magic wand that could just fix things -- often
very ridiculous stupid things. i don't, and pushing actual changes is super slow
and hairy, and i'm impatient -- so i (and team) built that magic wand, software
to let me sketch out my vision. my hope is that if people can more easily
imagine and visualize something different, they'll communicate more effectively
about it and those changes will go through more easily, and with more
particpation from people.

the vision here will just be transforming existing roadspace to add cycle infra,
often with actual protection from vehicles. usually taking awayparking or extra
lanes. there are plenty of other changes I want to see to MASS, many in the
light rail, bus, LTN/superblock, land use directions, not covered here.

bias, south seattle but the good news is, the tool built is designed to let YOU
share your own vision. so give it a spin and share your dream.

link to alt plans, like near-term / in progress builds, and the basic bike
network master plan

## interacting

link to tool

quick instructions

share your own thing!!

i'll try to give motivation about elevation / alt routes sucking.

then at the end, a mor data-driven argument about why these extensions would
"ungap the map"

## the changes

### Boyer / Fuhrman

This is practically the origin story of A/B Street; it only takes one truck
passing super close and almost pancaking me into the line of parked cars...

Swapping parking for some dedicated lanes is a really tough sell between the
university bridge and 520 underpass, though. Having lived in the area for a few
years (when I still had a jeep to park), I can confirm how low the area is on
street parking. Although the area's strategically close to UW and downtown for
biking, nearby transit connections are a bit of a walk. Also, Fuhrman has a
bunch of curb bulbs and traffic islands that would force bikes to merge back
into the main lane every few blocks, so this would probably be a bigger paving
project.

The alternative route is to cross the university or Montlake bridge and take the
Burke, or take the scenic route through south campus. But depending which way
you're going, this is a long detour, and probably forces you over the Montlake
bridge, meaning navigating the absolute mess of Montlake/520. It's possible the
[the lid](https://wsdot.wa.gov/projects/sr520/montlake/home) will make this area
less terrible, but... not sure how. (There are some tricks like the Bill Dawson
trail that slightly ease the pain...)

It's possible there's some
[plan](https://twitter.com/typewriteralley/status/1445922612421402626/photo/1)
for Fuhrman?!

### NE 45th St

[Joe Mangan](https://www.theurbanist.org/2021/01/27/reclaiming-ne-45th-street-from-cars/)
presents this vision way more eloquently than I could. Another organization has
called for better facilities on
[the I5 bridge](https://www.glwstreets.org/45th-st-bridge-overview), but I'd
personally like to make the connecton all the way from the udistrict to
Wallingfjord, patronizing all the shops along the way without hustling to keep
up with traffic.

I thought about 50th as an alternative, but it's farther from the action in the
udistrict (including the brand new Link station!) and would skip the Wallingford
business district.

### Aurora Ave

This is a trivial argument by checking elevation. If you're going north from
Fremont, climbing Fremont Ave, then Phinney and Greenwood Ave at least has some
paint. But just look at how gentle the elevation using Aurora would be! Looking
the other direction, it could be a straight shot -- a bicycle superhighway --
from all of north Seattle right to downtown.

I would sometimes brave the bus lane when I lived in Lichton Springs. If you've
got your wits about you and don't mind cars flying by at 50mph, it's, uh, fine.
The right-of-way is massive -- there's absolutely room at

stretches of it when i lived in lichton. it's fine in the bus lane, but it's a
little unnerving with cars flying by at 50-60. i'm on high alert for somebody
using it as an acceleration lane or to turn right quickly, which... happens. so,
planters here.

[Aurora Reimagined Coalition](https://www.got99problems.org)

https://www.glwstreets.org/complete-the-loop

### Rainier Ave

The most direct connection between the international district and Colombia City
is straight down Rainier, a nearly flat route:

<!-- profile -->

But Rainier has one of the highest fatality rates (link)... In most places, it's
a 5-lane highway, meaning there's plenty of room to add some protected lanes,
giving more people easy access to the many businesses along the corridor:

<!-- img -->

I've ended the changes at Orcas, since I'm not familiar with what's south of
that and might be a useful connection.

https://twitter.com/Zee_Shaner/status/1433630099924946962 lists this...

### Eastlake Ave

Eastlake would be the de facto route between the university district and
downtown, if it weren't for the intermitent mess of parked cars currently.
Shoulder space to avoid traffic appears and disappears, and some of the parking
is even supposed to be banned during rush hour. I believe as part of the
RapidRide J plan, Eastlake is supposed to get some dedicated lanes! Until then,
we can imagine how awesome it'll be:

<!-- img -->

The alternative today is following the Chesiudad (sp) loop through
neighborhoods. It's nice and scenic, but weaves through steep alleyways -- not a
commuter route.

- https://twitter.com/SD70MACMAN/status/1446148993042423813/photo/1

### Lakeview

One reasonable way to access lower Capitol Hill or downtown from the university
district area is along Lakeview. This makes use of a nice bike-only connection
near Melrose, and pops you out right into the heart of a commercial area. The
gap is near the I5 colonnade. Currently this is one lane each direction, with
parking usually on both sides. There's an I5 exit in the middle. So in practice,
this nonsense happens:

- twitter footage

Just nuke the parking and add bike lanes. I'm not sure what to do with the
Boylston Ave portion. There's a physical median there today, making the lane
pretty narrow, and I've heard stories about really aggressive cars squeezing
past at high speed. There is parking on the west side of that street, so
potentially that could be sacrificed and the median shifted over, to dedicate
shoulder space for biking on both sides.

### Harvard from Shelby to Roanoke

If you're crossing the university bridge and want to go to Capitol Hill, you're
probably taking Harvard to Roanoke to Broadway:

route

There's a climbing lane up Harvard, but it just gives up at Shelby. There are
two full lanes at this point and is usually OK, but I've had a few stressful
experiences with aggressive vehicles. There's just one driving lane uphill
before Shelby, so why not just keep it that way, or make it a bus/bike lane for
the (i forget the number)?

- it just disappears! supposed to cut across and go through the neighborhood,
  theres even a diagonal diverter at broadway/edgar to prevent rat-runs. but...
  eh
- be generous northbound/downhill, leave the 2 lanes for passing people tryng to
  get on i5?

### Broadway between Highland and Denny

- detouring on harvard maybe, but bumpy and away from business
- note OSM data super funky, looks like the road changes width constantly,
  should go fix that. same eastlake
- this is a mess, maybe parking to loading zones. really one of those places
  super well served by transit, driving is kind of inexcusable
- i happened to be walking by few months ago and saw someone hit, so...
  anecdata's strong.

### The missing link

- this one's a story. i'm not going to weigh in on preferred option (though that
  ballard cafe street is awesome)

### Airport Way S

- fedex in afternoon rush hour
- another nice flat one. the edits here show a lane taken away, but actualy
  southbound, the shoulder is wide enough to work without taking a lane.
  absolutely dumb that vehicles flying around the 15ft lane
- SODO trail and 6th a quieter alt; i wasnt familiar and google maps routing
  sucked (hey another use...)

### Others

- east/west in north seattle?
  - based on contours, 75th
- lake wash blvd. not lanes, some kind of extended stay healthy
- 15th to elliot
- madison?

## Estimating how much these might help

link to methodology

in summary, VMT and carbon... number of trips converted

## conclusion

hopefully this is helpful to see. feedback. share your own vision.
